>> Thompson: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, APRIL 29: 100 DAYS IN
OFFICE-- WHAT PROMISES HAS
PRESIDENT TRUMP FULFILLED?
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, WILL
TAX REFORMS BEING CONSIDERED IN
WASHINGTON STOP COMPANIES FROM
RELOCATING OVERSEAS?
AND A LOOK AT THE LOS ANGELES
RIOTS 25 YEARS LATER.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
MEGAN THOMPSON.
>> Thompson: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP IS
MARKING HIS 100th DAY IN OFFICE
WITH A VISIT AND RALLY TONIGHT
IN A KEY SWING STATE THAT
PROPELLED HIM TO THE WHITE
HOUSE.
MR. TRUMP IS EXPECTED TO ADDRESS
SUPPORTERS IN HARRISBURG, THE
CAPITAL OF PENNSYLVANIA, WHICH
BACKED HIM LAST NOVEMBER, THE
FIRST TIME THE STATE WENT
REPUBLICAN SINCE 1988.
BEFORE THE RALLY, THE PRESIDENT
WAS SET TO VISIT A SHOVEL AND
GARDENING TOOL MANUFACTURER AND
SIGN AN EXECUTIVE ORDER
DIRECTING THE COMMERCE
DEPARTMENT AND THE U.S. TRADE
REPRESENTATIVE TO IDENTIFY TRADE
AGREEMENT VIOLATIONS BY OTHER
COUNTRIES AND RECOMMEND
SOLUTIONS WITHIN SIX MONTHS.
EARLIER, IN HIS WEEKLY ADDRESS,
THE PRESIDENT TOUTED HIS RECORD
ON SAVING JOBS AND BRINGING
CHANGE TO WASHINGTON.
>> THE MOST FUNDAMENTAL CHANGE
CAN BE FOUND IN THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN THE PEOPLE AND THEIR
GOVERNMENT.
FOR TOO LONG, POLITICIANS CARED
MORE ABOUT SPECIAL INTERESTS
THAN THEY DID ABOUT A VERY
SUCCESSFUL FUTURE FOR ALL
AMERICANS.
THEY TOOK OUR TAXPAYERS' MONEY
AND SENT THEIR JOBS AND WEALTH
TO OTHER COUNTRIES.
NOT ANYMORE.
>> Thompson: LAST NIGHT, THE
PRESIDENT SIGNED A SPENDING BILL
PASSED BY CONGRESS TO KEEP THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT RUNNING FOR
ANOTHER WEEK.
THOUGH 100 DAYS IN OFFICE EQUALS
A MERE 7% OF A FULL FOUR-YEAR
TERM, THE MEASUREMENT HAS
DOMINATED THE CONVERSATION ABOUT
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION THIS
WEEK.
THE STANDARD WAS SET BY FRANKLIN
DELANO ROOSEVELT, WHOSE
LEADERSHIP IN 1933 PUSHED A
FLURRY OF MAJOR LEGISLATION
THROUGH CONGRESS TO COMBAT THE
GREAT DEPRESSION.
JOINING ME NOW FROM SANTA
BARBARA, CALIFORNIA, TO TALK
ABOUT MR. TRUMP'S FIRST 14 WEEKS
ON THE JOB IS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT, JEFF
GREENFIELD.
JEFF, IT'S GOOD TO SEE YOU.
SO HERE WE ARE, 100 DAYS IN.
BUT YOU'VE SAID ON THIS PROGRAM
AND YOU'VE WRITTEN THAT YOU
DON'T REALLY THINK THIS 100-DAYS
MEASUREMENT IS A VERY RELIABLE
WAY TO MEASURE A PRESIDENT.
BUT DIDN'T TRUMP INVITE THIS
MEASUREMENT IN THE SPEECH HE
GAVE RIGHT BEFORE THE ELECTION
IN GETTYSBURG?
>> YES, OCTOBER 22, HE SET DOWN
A 100-DAY ACTION PLAN.
HE LATER RELEASED A CONTRACT
WITH 28 SPECIFIC PROPOSALS
COVERING EVERYTHING FROM
LEGISLATION TO EXECUTIVE ORDERS
TO APPOINTMENTS TO TREATY
POLICY.
AND IF YOU JUDGE HIM BY THAT
METRIC, IT IS VERY MUCH A MIXED
BAG.
HE DID GET A CONSERVATIVE
JUSTICE NOT ONLY NOMINATED BUT
CONFIRMED.
PULLED OUT OF THE TRANS-PACIFIC
PARTNERSHIP, IS SET TO
RENEGOTIATE NAFTA, HAS PUT A
FLURRY OF EXECUTIVE ORDERS OUT
THAT SEVERELY CHANGE THE
ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY.
ON THE OTHER HAND, ON SOME
ISSUES HE'S JUST SIMPLY BACKED
OFF; NO, CHINA IS NOT A CURRENCY
MANIPULATOR, WHICH HE SAID HE
WOULD DECLARE THEM ON DAY ONE.
NO, NATO IS NOT OBSOLETE.
AND ON THE LEGISLATIVE FRONT,
NOTHING HAS BEEN PASSED; EVEN
THE DESPERATE EFFORT TO GET SOME
KIND OF HEALTH CARE BILL THROUGH
THE HOUSE BEFORE 100 DAYS DIED.
>> SO THE WHITE HOUSE HAS
DISMISSED THIS 100-DAY
MEASUREMENT, BUT IT'S ALSO
SIMULTANEOUSLY CLAIMED TO HAVE
MADE MORE ACHIEVEMENTS THAN ANY
PRESIDENT SINCE F.D.R.
I MEAN, IS THIS PART OF A
PATTERN?
>> YOU'RE ABSOLUTELY RIGHT, IT'S
DOUBLETHINK.
ON THE ONE HAND, THEY SAY-- AND
I HAPPEN TO THINK THEY'RE
RIGHT-- THIS IS A LUDICROUS
METRIC; AND ON THE OTHER HAND,
THEY HAVE TRIED TO COBBLE
TOGETHER THIS CLAIM OF A RECORD
SET OF ACHIEVEMENTS.
THE KINDEST WAY TO DESCRIBE THAT
IS OVER-REACH AND THE LESS KIND
WAY IS TO CHANNEL JOHN McENROE
AND SAY "YOU CANNOT BE SERIOUS."
AT THIS POINT, BARACK OBAMA HAD
HAD HIS MASSIVE STIMULUS BILL
PASSED.
RONALD REAGAN'S TAX CUTS WERE
WELL ON THEIR WAY THROUGH THE
LEGISLATIVE PROCESS.
GEORGE W. BUSH'S TAX CUT AND
EDUCATION PLANS WERE, AS WELL.
I THINK THEY WOULD HAVE BEEN
OFF, AND I THINK THEY WOULD HAVE
BEEN ON BETTER HISTORICAL
GROUNDS TO SAY, "LOOK, WE'RE NOT
PLAYING THIS MEDIA GAME.
IT'S A RIDICULOUS MEASUREMENT.
COME BACK TO US IN A FEW MONTHS,
LET'S SEE WHERE WE ARE."
>> SO, GIVEN YOUR SKEPTICISM
ABOUT WHAT 100 DAYS CAN TELL US,
WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED?
>> YEAH, I THINK THERE ARE TWO
THINGS.
ONE, IN ECONOMIC TERMS, THE IDEA
THAT TRUMP WAS GOING TO BE A
POPULIST PRESIDENT JUST HAS TO
BE CLEARED OFF THE BOARD.
HE SAID DURING THE CAMPAIGN,
"YEAH, THERE ARE GOING TO BE
HIGHER TAXES ON THE RICH.
IT'S GOING TO HURT ME."
EVERY PROPOSAL IN THAT ONE-PAGE
SET OF BULLET POINTS, POINTS THE
OTHER WAY.
WHAT REMAINS OF THE "POPULIST"
APPROACH IS, FOR INSTANCE, HIS
ATTITUDE TOWARD TRADE, THOSE
WICKED FOREIGN COUNTRIES THAT
ARE EATING OUR LUNCH, AND
ON IMMIGRATION.
BUT ON ECONOMIC GROUNDS, THIS IS
A CLASSIC CONSERVATIVE
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENCY.
THE OTHER THING I THINK WE CAN
SEE IS THAT THE IDEA THAT TRUMP
WAS GOING TO RADICALLY CHANGE
HOW HE DECIDES IS ALSO, I THINK,
A NONSTARTER.
THIS IS A UNIQUE PRESIDENT IN
TERMS OF HIS SKEPTICISM ABOUT
DETAILED POLICY PROPOSALS, HIS
IMPATIENCE WITH DETAIL, HIS
RELIANCE ON HIS OWN INSTINCTS,
HOW HE GATHERS INFORMATION
FROM FRIENDS ON LATE-NIGHT
TELEPHONE CALLS AND WATCHING
MORNING CABLE NEWS SHOWS.
THIS IS WHO DONALD TRUMP IS.
AND I THINK THOSE WHO THOUGHT,
"OH, WELL, THE WHITE HOUSE IS
IS GOING TO CHANGE HIM," I DON'T
THINK THAT'S RIGHT.
I THINK WHAT YOU SEE IS WHAT YOU
GET AND WHAT WE'RE GOING TO GET
FOR THE NEXT 93% OF THE TERM.
>> ALL RIGHT, NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JEFF
GREENFIELD.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR JOINING
US.
>> PLEASURE, MEGAN.
>> Thompson: NORTH KOREA'S
LATEST FAILED MISSILE TEST IS
GENERATING A STORM OF
DENUNCIATION.
THE MEDIUM-RANGE MISSILE
LAUNCHED FROM A SITE NEAR THE
CAPITAL OF PYONGYANG EXPLODED A
FEW MINUTES AFTER TAKEOFF EARLY
TODAY OVER THE SEA OF JAPAN.
IN A TWEET, PRESIDENT TRUMP SAID
THE TEST WAS AN AFFRONT TO NORTH
KOREA'S MAIN ALLY.
ON A VISIT TO LONDON, JAPANESE
PRIME MINISTER SHINZO ABE SAID
THE LAUNCH WAS "A GRAVE THREAT
TO OUR COUNTRY.
THIS IS ABSOLUTELY NOT
ACCEPTABLE."
AS A PRECAUTION, FOR THE FIRST
TIME, TOKYO SHUT DOWN A MAJOR
SUBWAY LINE FOLLOWING WORD OF
THE MISSILE LAUNCH.
IT REOPENED AFTER TEN MINUTES.
OFF THE DIVIDED KOREAN
PENINSULA, A U.S. NAVY STRIKE
GROUP LED BY THE AIRCRAFT
CARRIER "CARL VINSON" BEGAN
JOINT EXERCISES WITH SOUTH
KOREAN WARSHIPS TODAY, MANEUVERS
SOUTH KOREA SAID ARE MEANT TO
DETER NORTH KOREA'S
"PROVOCATIONS."
NORTH KOREA CALLED THE
"VINSON'S" ARRIVAL "A RECKLESS
ACTION OF THE WAR MANIACS."
POPE FRANCIS ENDED A RARE VISIT
TO A PREDOMINANTLY MUSLIM
COUNTRY TODAY, EGYPT, AND
CELEBRATED MASS WITH THE
COUNTRY'S SMALL CATHOLIC
COMMUNITY.
SECURITY WAS EXTREMELY TIGHT
AROUND THE STADIUM FILLED WITH
AN ESTIMATED 15,000 PEOPLE.
THE POPE URGED EGYPT'S MUSLIMS
TO JOIN FORCES TO PROTECT THE
COPTIC CHRISTIAN MINORITY FROM
ATTACKS BY ISLAMIST MILITANTS
WHO KILLED AT LEAST 45 PEOPLE IN
AN ATTACK THREE WEEKS AGO.
FRANCIS ALSO WARNED AGAINST THE
DANGERS OF RELIGIOUS FANATICISM.
>> (translated): TRUE FAITH
LEADS US TO PROTECT THE RIGHTS
OF OTHERS WITH THE SAME ZEAL AND
ENTHUSIASM WITH WHICH WE DEFEND
OUR OWN.
>> Thompson: EUROPE IS
PRESENTING A FIRM AND UNITED
FRONT ON BRITAIN'S LOOMING SPLIT
FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION.
AT A SUMMIT IN BRUSSELS TODAY,
LEADERS OF THE OTHER 27 E.U.
MEMBER NATIONS TOOK ONLY A
MINUTE TO UNANIMOUSLY APPROVE
THEIR NEGOTIATING TACTICS FOR
THE BREXIT TALKS THAT ARE
EXPECTED TO BEGIN IN JUNE AND
LAST TWO YEARS.
THE EUROPEAN LEADERS DASHED
BRITAIN'S HOPES TO NEGOTIATE A
FREE TRADE DEAL DURING THE TALKS
AND SAID THEIR TOP PRIORITIES
WILL BE THE RIGHTS OF MILLIONS
OF EUROPEAN EXPATRIATES LIVING
IN BRITAIN.
THE LEADERS ALSO ACKNOWLEDGED
NORTHERN IRELAND COULD POSSIBLY
JOIN THE E.U. IN THE FUTURE IF
IT VOTES TO UNITE WITH THE
REPUBLIC OF IRELAND, WHICH
ALREADY BELONGS.
>> Thompson: THIS WEEK, THE
WHITE HOUSE ANNOUNCED A BROAD,
SINGLE-PAGE OUTLINE FOR TAX
REFORM, ONE OF THE NEXT BIG
ITEMS ON CONGRESS' AGENDA.
THE LAST TIME THE TAX CODE HAD A
MAJOR REWRITE WAS 1986, WHEN
RONALD REAGAN WAS PRESIDENT, BUT
CONSERVATIVES AND LIBERALS SEEM
TO AGREE THE SYSTEM IS RIPE FOR
OVERHAUL, ESPECIALLY WHEN IT
COMES TO CORPORATE TAXES.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT PATRICIA
SABGA REPORTS ON EFFORTS TO
CHANGE RULES EXPLOITED BY
CORPORATIONS THAT COST THE
TREASURY BILLIONS OF DOLLARS A
YEAR.
>> MY ECONOMIC TEAM IS
DEVELOPING HISTORIC TAX REFORM.
>> Reporter: FROM THE WHITE
HOUSE TO CAPITOL HILL,
REPUBLICANS ARE DETERMINED TO
LOWER THE 35% CORPORATE TAX
RATE, THE HIGHEST OF ANY
DEVELOPED ECONOMY.
BUT THE TAX CODE IS FILLED WITH
PROVISIONS THAT ALLOW COMPANIES
TO PAY LESS.
MATT GARDNER IS A SENIOR FELLOW
WITH THE INSTITUTE ON TAXATION
AND ECONOMIC POLICY, A LIBERAL
WASHINGTON-BASED THINK TANK.
>> THE BIGGEST, MOST PROFITABLE
CORPORATIONS ARE NOW FINDING IT
ALMOST ROUTINE TO ESCAPE PAYING
THE 35% TAX.
IN SOME CASES, THEY'RE EASILY
FINDING WAYS TO AVOID PAYING ANY
INCOME TAX AT ALL.
>> Reporter: THAT'S BECAUSE EVEN
THOUGH THE U.S. TAXES INCOME
EARNED ANYWHERE IN THE WORLD,
THE TAX CODE ALLOWS AMERICAN
COMPANIES TO DEFER PAYING TAXES
ON INCOME EARNED BY THEIR
FOREIGN SUBSIDIARIES
INDEFINITELY AS LONG AS THE
PROFITS ARE NOT RETURNED TO THE
PARENT COMPANY IN THE U.S.
HERE'S A SIMPLE EXAMPLE: AN
AMERICAN COMPANY THAT EARNS
$1 BILLION IN PROFITS ON SALES
IN THE UNITED STATES WOULD FACE
A U.S. TAX BILL OF $350 MILLION
BEFORE DEDUCTIONS, CREDITS AND
WRITE-OFFS.
BUT IF THE COMPANY RECORDS THOSE
PROFITS TO AN OVERSEAS
SUBSIDIARY IN, SAY, IRELAND,
WHERE THE CORPORATE TAX RATE IS
ONLY 12.5%, IT WOULD OWE THE
IRISH GOVERNMENT $125 MILLION
BEFORE ANY ADJUSTMENTS AND
NOTHING TO THE U.S. TREASURY AS
LONG AS THE MONEY IS NOT BROUGHT
HOME.
GARDNER'S SISTER ORGANIZATION,
CITIZENS FOR TAX JUSTICE,
ESTIMATES THE DEFERRAL HAS
ENABLED U.S.CORPORATIONS TO
AMASS AT LEAST $2.6 TRILLION
OVERSEAS.
WHEN A MAJOR CORPORATION
BASICALLY SHIFTS A LOT OF ITS
PROFITS OVERSEAS, HOW THEN DO
ORDINARY AMERICANS END UP
FOOTING THE BILL?
>> THE MOST DIRECT WAY IS
THROUGH LARGE SCALE SPENDING
CUTS, LESS DIRECT SPENDING ON
ALL THE THINGS THAT MAKE THE
UNITED STATES A GOOD PLACE TO
LIVE-- HEALTHCARE,
TRANSPORTATION, EDUCATION, ALL
THE PUBLIC SERVICES THAT WE FIND
MOST VITAL.
>> Reporter: ONE LEGAL MANEUVER
COMPANIES USE TO MINIMIZE THEIR
U.S. TAX BILL IS TO SELL OR
LICENSE INTANGIBLE ASSETS, LIKE
SOFTWARE OR DRUG PATENTS, TO A
LOWER-TAX FOREIGN SUBSIDIARY.
WHEN A PRODUCT MADE WITH THAT
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY IS SOLD,
THE FOREIGN SUBSIDIARY RECORDS
THE INCOME.
AND BECAUSE OF THAT, U.S. TAXES
CAN BE DEFERRED.
>> WE COUNTED 10,000 TAX HAVEN
SUBSIDIARIES AMONG FORTUNE 500
CORPORATIONS.
DEFERRAL CREATES A CLEAR
INCENTIVE FOR COMPANIES TO SHIFT
THEIR ACTIVITIES OFFSHORE, BUT,
MORE DAMAGINGLY, IT CREATES A
CLEAR INCENTIVE FOR THEM TO
PRETEND THEY'RE SHIFTING THEIR
ACTIVITIES OFFSHORE.
>> Reporter: PRETENDING TO SHIFT
ACTIVITIES OFFSHORE IS ALSO THE
MAIN CRITIQUE OF ANOTHER LEGAL
TACTIC KNOWN AS AN INVERSION.
THAT'S WHEN AN AMERICAN COMPANY
CHANGES ITS CORPORATE
CITIZENSHIP BY ACQUIRING A FIRM
BASED IN A LOWER TAX COUNTRY OR
JURISDICTION.
SINCE THE 1980s, MORE THAN 50
AMERICAN COMPANIES HAVE PULLED
THIS OFF, WITH 25 SUCH DEALS IN
THE PAST FIVE YEARS ALONE.
SAMSONITE, THE CENTURY-OLD
LUGGAGE MAKER, MOVED ITS TAX
ADDRESS FROM MASSACHUSETTS TO
LUXEMBOURG, WHERE THE CORPORATE
TAX RATE IS 19%.
RESTAURANT BRANDS INTERNATIONAL,
PARENT OF FAST-FOOD CHAIN BURGER
KING, RELOCATED ITS HEADQUARTERS
FROM FLORIDA TO CANADA, WHERE
THE CORPORATE TAX RATE IS 15%.
BUT THE NUMBER ONE DESTINATION
FOR TAX INVERSIONS IS IRELAND,
WHERE, AT 12.5%, THE CORPORATE
TAX RATE IS NEARLY TWO-THIRDS
LOWER THAN THE U.S.
THE BIGGEST COMPANY TO CHANGE
ITS TAX ADDRESS FROM THE UNITED
STATES TO IRELAND IS MEDICAL
DEVICE MAKER MEDTRONIC, WHICH
STILL MAINTAINS A HEFTY PRESENCE
IN ITS NATIVE MINNESOTA.
MEDTRONIC'S OPERATIONAL
HEADQUARTERS AND ALL OF ITS TOP
EXECUTIVES ARE BASED IN THE
UNITED STATES, BUT ITS OFFICIAL
HEADQUARTERS IS HERE, IN DUBLIN,
IRELAND, IN THAT BUILDING BEHIND
ME.
THAT CHANGE OF ADDRESS WAS
ENGINEERED TWO YEARS AGO WHEN
MEDTRONIC BOUGHT COVIDIAN, AN
IRISH-BASED MEDICAL DEVICE
MAKER.
THIS MODEST BUILDING IN DUBLIN
MAY BE MEDTRONIC'S GLOBAL
HEADQUARTERS, BUT THE COMPANY
EMPLOYS AROUND 4,000 PEOPLE IN
IRELAND COMPARED TO MORE THAN
43,000 IN THE UNITED STATES.
>> THEY WENT OUT OF THEIR WAY TO
GUARANTEE THAT THEY WEREN'T
GOING TO MOVE EMPLOYEES OUT OF
MINNESOTA, THAT EVERYTHING FROM
A U.S. PERSPECTIVE WOULD REMAIN
EXACTLY AS IT WAS BEFORE.
>> Reporter: MEDTRONIC DECLINED
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S REQUEST TO BE
INTERVIEWED.
IN A WRITTEN STATEMENT, THE
COMPANY SAID:
>> WE DON'T OFFER ANY SWEETHEART
TAX DEALS TO ANY INDIVIDUAL
COMPANIES.
>> Reporter: IRELAND'S MINISTER
OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND TRADE,
CHARLIE FLANNIGAN, MAKES NO
APOLOGIES THAT 12 OF THE 20
BIGGEST COMPANIES IN IRELAND
HAVE ROOTS IN THE UNITED STATES.
HE SAYS MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
HAVE BROUGHT HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF JOBS TO HIS COUNTRY
AND PAY THEIR FAIR SHARE OF
IRISH TAXES.
>> WE WILL CONTINUE WITH A VERY
ATTRACTIVE RATE OF CORPORATION
TAX, BUT WE ALSO OFFER SOMETHING
THAT PERHAPS MIGHTN'T BE AS
EVIDENT IN THE UNITED STATES,
AND THAT IS A VERY SKILLED AND
ADAPTABLE WORKFORCE.
>> Reporter: VERONIQUE DE RUGY
IS A SENIOR FELLOW WITH THE
MERCATUS CENTER AT GEORGE MASON
UNIVERSITY, A CONSERVATIVE THINK
TANK PARTIALLY FUNDED BY THE
KOCH BROTHERS.
SHE SAYS CORPORATE TAXES
ULTIMATELY FALL ON WORKERS.
>> ECONOMICS 101-- WE KNOW NOW
THAT THE PERSON WRITING THE
CHECK IS NOT NECESSARILY THE ONE
SHOULDERING THE BURDEN OF THE
TAX.
70% OF THE BURDEN OF THE
CORPORATE INCOME TAX FALLS ON
WORKERS IN THE FORM OF LOWER
WAGES.
>> OUR OBJECTIVE IS TO MAKE U.S.
BUSINESSES THE MOST COMPETITIVE
IN THE WORLD.
>> Reporter: WHEN THE TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION UNVEILED ITS ONE-
PAGE OUTLINE FOR REWRITING THE
TAX CODE THIS WEEK, IT FEATURED
A CUT IN THE CORPORATE TAX RATE
FROM 35% TO 15%.
THE WHITE HOUSE ALSO WANTS A
ONE-TIME "TAX HOLIDAY" THAT
WOULD ALLOW AMERICAN COMPANIES
TO REPATRIATE THAT $2.6 TRILLION
IN OVERSEAS CASH AT A REDUCED
THOUGH AS YET UNSPECIFIED RATE.
>> WHICH WILL BRING BACK
TRILLIONS OF DOLLARS THAT ARE
OFFSHORE TO BE INVESTED HERE IN
THE UNITED STATES TO PURCHASE
CAPITAL AND TO CREATE JOBS.
>> Reporter: IN ADDITION, THE
WHITE HOUSE WANTS TO STOP TAXING
PROFITS EARNED OVERSEAS.
THAT'S ALSO A STAPLE OF THE TAX
REFORM BLUEPRINT BY HOUSE
SPEAKER PAUL RYAN AND HOUSE WAYS
AND MEANS COMMITTEE CHAIRMAN
KEVIN BRADY.
THE RYAN-BRADY PLAN WOULD CUT
THE CORPORATE TAX RATE TO 20%,
NOT 15%, AND WOULD INTRODUCE A
NEW TAX ON IMPORTS TO OFFSET THE
REVENUE LOSS.
REPUBLICAN ILLINOIS CONGRESSMAN
PETER ROSKAM CHAIRS THE HOUSE
WAYS AND MEANS SUBCOMMITTEE ON
TAX POLICY.
>> TAX CUTS HAVE TO PAY FOR
THEMSELVES.
OUR ARGUMENT IS THIS WILL CREATE
GROWTH, AND THAT PAYS FOR
ITSELF.
>> Reporter: THE PROPOSED NEW
TAX IS CALLED A BORDER
ADJUSTMENT TAX, A 20% LEVY ON
IMPORTS WHICH ROSKAM SAYS WILL
ENCOURAGE COMPANIES TO PRODUCE
MORE IN THE U.S. AND KEEP
PROFITS HERE.
>> RIGHT NOW, IF YOU'RE A
MANUFACTURER IN THE CHICAGO
AREA, IF YOU'RE IN MY
CONSTITUENCY AND YOU'RE MAKING A
PRODUCT, THE COST OF YOUR
PRODUCT INCLUDES THE INCOME TAX
THAT THE COMPANY PAYS FOR THAT.
THEN, WHEN IT'S EXPORTED AND IT
GOES INTO ANOTHER JURISDICTION--
IT GOES TO, LET'S SAY GERMANY,
FOR EXAMPLE-- THE GERMANS MOVE
THAT IN, AND THEY TAX IT, AS
WELL.
OUR WEAKNESS HERE IS THAT THE
INVERSE IS NOT TRUE.
SO, IF YOU'RE A GERMAN
MANUFACTURER AND YOU'RE MAKING
SOMETHING IN STUTTGART, GERMANY,
WHEN IT COMES TO THE UNITED
STATES, WE DON'T TAX IT.
SO, LITERALLY, OUR PRODUCTS ARE
DOUBLE TAXED, THEIRS ARE NOT
TAXED.
>> Reporter: THE C.E.O.s OF 16
AMERICAN EXPORTING GIANTS WHICH
UNDERPIN MILLIONS OF AMERICAN
JOBS, INCLUDING BOEING AND
CATERPILLAR, AGREE.
IN A LETTER TO CONGRESS, THEY
SAID THE BORDER ADJUSTMENT TAX
IS A "CRITICAL ELEMENT" OF TAX
REFORM "THAT ENSURES GOODS AND
SERVICES PRODUCED ABROAD FACE
THE SAME TAX BURDEN AS THOSE
PRODUCED IN THE UNITED STATES."
BUT MORE THAN 100 AMERICAN
COMPANIES AND TRADE GROUPS THAT
RELY ON CHEAP IMPORTS--
INCLUDING RETAILER WALMART,
WHICH ALONE EMPLOYS 1.5 MILLION
AMERICANS-- OPPOSE A BORDER
ADJUSTMENT TAX.
THEY SAY IT WOULD INCREASE THEIR
COSTS, LEAVING THEM LITTLE
CHOICE BUT TO RAISE PRICES FOR
CONSUMERS.
BUT CONGRESSMAN ROSKAM SAYS
THAT'S UNLIKELY BECAUSE A BORDER
ADJUSTMENT TAX WILL INCREASE THE
VALUE OF THE DOLLAR AND
EFFECTIVELY LOWER THE COST OF
IMPORTS.
>> AS THESE BORDER ADJUSTMENT
MOVES IN, THE DOLLAR GETS
STRONGER, THE PRICE OF IMPORTS
GETS LOWER, AND WE CAN MAKE
TRANSITION RULES THAT ARE
REASONABLE FOR COMPANIES.
>> Reporter: MANY ECONOMISTS,
INCLUDING VERONIQUE DE RUGY,
QUESTION WHETHER THE DOLLAR
WOULD RISE SUFFICIENTLY.
>> THE IDEA THAT THE DOLLAR WILL
ADJUST NOT ONLY PERFECTLY AND
COMPLETELY TO THE BORDER
ADJUSTMENT TAX BUT ALSO QUICKLY
IS AN ARTICLE OF FAITH.
>> Reporter: IN FEBRUARY,
PRESIDENT TRUMP SAID A BORDER
ADJUSTMENT TAX "COULD LEAD TO A
LOT MORE JOBS IN THE UNITED
STATES."
BUT THIS WEEK, TREASURY
SECRETARY STEVEN MNUCHIN SAID
THE WHITE HOUSE DOES NOT SUPPORT
IT "IN ITS CURRENT FORM."
THE WHITE HOUSE SAYS ITS
CORPORATE TAX CUTS WILL PAY FOR
THEMSELVES THROUGH HIGHER
ECONOMIC GROWTH.
BUT WITH MANY ECONOMISTS WARNING
THAT THE PLAN COULD ADD
TRILLIONS TO THE FEDERAL BUDGET
DEFICIT, THERE ARE SERIOUS
DIFFERENCES TO BRIDGE TO PARLAY
FRUSTRATION WITH THE CORPORATE
TAX CODE INTO FUNDAMENTAL
CHANGE.
>> WE CAN'T STAY HERE.
THIS CURRENT TAX CODE IS A
FAILURE.
THERE IS A MASSIVE AMOUNT OF
MONEY, AND WHETHER IT'S
$1 TRILLION, $2 TRILLION,
$3 TRILLION OR $4 TRILLION, IT'S
TOO MUCH MONEY THAT'S STUCK
OVERSEAS.
AND WE NEED TO CREATE AN
ENVIRONMENT WHERE THAT MONEY CAN
COME BACK.
>> Thompson: READ ABOUT A NEW
ANTHOLOGY THAT EXPLORES BLACK
MEN'S FEELINGS ON CHILDHOOD AND
MASCULINITY.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
25 YEARS AGO THIS WEEKEND, PARTS
OF LOS ANGELES WERE IN FLAMES.
NEIGHBORHOODS ERUPTED WITH ANGER
AFTER FOUR WHITE L.A. POLICE
OFFICERS WERE ACQUITTED OF
ASSAULTING MOTORIST RODNEY KING
EVEN THOUGH VIDEOTAPE HAD SHOWN
THEM BEATING HIM 56 TIMES WITH
THEIR BATONS.
THE RIOTS LASTED FIVE DAYS, LEFT
63 PEOPLE DEAD AND DESTROYED OR
DAMAGED MORE THAN 1,000
BUILDINGS.
SOME RESIDENTS OF THE CITY
MARCHED TODAY TO COMMEMORATE
THOSE WHO DIED AND SUFFERED
LOSSES IN THE EVENT.
PERHAPS SURPRISINGLY, SIX OUT OF
TEN L.A. RESIDENTS BELIEVE
ANOTHER CIVIL DISTURBANCE IS
LIKELY IN THE NEXT FIVE YEARS.
THIS ACCORDING TO AN ONGOING
SURVEY CONDUCTED BY LOYOLA
MARYMOUNT UNIVERSITY.
JOINING ME FROM L.A. TO DISCUSS
THIS IS MARYMOUNT UNIVERSITY
PROFESSOR FERNANDO GUERRA.
FIRST, YOU CAN JUST TELL US
LITTLE BIT ABOUT THIS POLL.
YOU'VE BEEN DOING IT EVERY FIVE
YEARS SINCE THE RIOTS.
WHAT HAVE YOU FOUND IN PREVIOUS
YEARS?
>> THE MAIN THING IS THAT THE
VAST MAJORITY OF INDICATORS ARE
VERY POSITIVE ABOUT THE CITY AND
THE FUTURE OF THE CITY.
OF COURSE, THERE ARE SOME
CHALLENGES, AND ONE OF THE
CHALLENGES IS THE LIKELIHOOD OF
ANOTHER RIOT.
AND FOR THE FIRST TIME IN THE
LAST 20 YEARS, WE HAD AN UPTICK
IN THE NUMBER OF RESIDENTS WHO
BELIEVE ANOTHER RIOT IS LIKELY.
>> TELL ME WHY IS THAT?
>> PART OF IT IS THAT,
OBVIOUSLY, LATINOS AND AFRICAN
AMERICANS FELT MORE LIKELY...
THAT A RIOT WOULD BE MORE LIKELY
THAN WHITES AND ASIANS, BUT ALSO
MILLENNIALS, THE YOUNG PEOPLE,
MANY OF THEM WHO WERE NOT
AROUND WHEN THIS HAPPENED.
FOR LATINOS AND AFRICAN
AMERICANS, A LOT OF THE THINGS
THAT CAUSED THE RIOTS, MOSTLY
ECONOMIC DISPARITY, CONTINUE IN
LOS ANGELES AND ARE ACTUALLY A
LITTLE BIT WORSE.
>> Thompson: TALK TO ME A
LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT THE
MILLENNIALS WHO YOU FOUND WERE
THE MOST LIKELY TO THINK THAT
THIS COULD HAPPEN AGAIN.
>> I THINK WHAT HAPPENS IS,
NUMBER ONE, WE DID THIS SURVEY
IN JANUARY.
NUMBER TWO, LOS ANGELES IS
OVERWHELMINGLY A DEMOCRATIC
CITY.
ONLY 17% OF US VOTED FOR DONALD
TRUMP.
AND THE SENSE THAT THERE HAS TO
BE CIVIC ACTION IS REALLY
STRONG, ESPECIALLY AMONGST THE
MILLENNIALS.
SO THEY'RE WILLING TO TAKE THE
RESISTANCE TO THE CURRENT
ADMINISTRATION TO A MUCH GREATER
DEGREE THAN THOSE WHO
EXPERIENCED THE ACTUAL RIOTS IN
1992.
>> Thompson: TALK TO ME A
LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT THE
ECONOMIC SITUATION FOR
MINORITIES IN LOS ANGELES.
HOW'S THAT PLAYED A ROLE?
>> SURE.
WE HAVE SEEN IN THE LOS ANGELES
THE LAST 25 YEARS, A CONTINUING
DEINDUSTRIALIZATION, SHIFTING
FROM A MANUFACTURING TO A
SERVICE AND KNOWLEDGE ECONOMY.
THIS HAS CREATED A TREMENDOUS
AMOUNT OF DISPARITY.
NEXT YEAR, OR THIS YEAR, LOS
ANGELES WILL PROBABLY CREATE
MORE MILLIONAIRES THAN ANY OTHER
REGION, WITH THE POSSIBLE
EXCEPTION OF THE SILICON VALLEY.
BUT IT WILL ALSO CREATE MORE
POVERTY THAN ANY OTHER REGION IN
ABSOLUTE NUMBERS.
AND YOU SEE IT PLAY OUT IN THIS
DISPARITY, AND IT CAUSES
TENSION.
>> Thompson: SO YOU TALK ABOUT
HOW ABOUT THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN THE COMMUNITY AND THE
POLICE?
HAS THAT IMPROVED AT ALL?
>> IT'S IMPROVED TREMENDOUSLY.
IN OUR POLL WE SHOW THAT PEOPLE
ARE TRUSTING L.A.P.D. TO AN EVER
GREATER EXTENT.
THERE WERE TREMENDOUS REFORMS.
POLICE CHIEFS ARE NOWHERE NEAR
AS POWERFUL AS THEY WERE OR
AUTONOMOUS AS THEY WERE.
THERE ARE STILL SHOOTINGS, AND
THERE IS STILL UNJUSTIFIED FORCE
THAT IS USED.
BUT THE MECHANISMS TO DEAL WITH
THAT IS MUCH GREATER.
THE MAJOR CHANGE, OF COURSE, FOR
NOT ONLY LOS ANGELES BUT THE
WORLD IS SOCIAL MEDIA AND THE
INTERNET, AND THINGS GO VIRAL.
REALLY, THE RODNEY KING
RECORDING WAS ONE OF THE FIRST
VIRAL VIDEOS, AND NOW WE'RE SO
USED TO THAT AND WE SEE
EVERYTHING THAT'S HAPPENING.
>> Thompson: PROFESSOR
FERNANDO GUERRA OF MARYMOUNT
UNIVERSITY, THANK YOU SO MUCH
FOR JOINING US.
>> OH, THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Thompson: THIS 100th DAY OF
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION DREW
TENS OF THOUSANDS OF
DEMONSTRATORS TO THE NATION'S
CAPITAL, THIS TIME FOR WHAT WAS
CALLED "THE PEOPLE'S CLIMATE
MARCH."
>>I BELIEVE THAT WE WILL!
>> Thompson: THE MARCH BEGAN ON
CAPITOL HILL AND MADE ITS WAY
ALONG PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE TO THE
WHITE HOUSE, DEMONSTRATORS
PROTESTING TRUMP ADMINISTRATION
ENVIRONMENTAL POLICIES.
CHIEF AMONG THEM, DISMANTLING
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S "CLEAN POWER
PLAN," WHICH LIMITED CARBON
DIOXIDE EMISSIONS FROM BURNING
COAL TO PRODUCE ELECTRICITY.
THE MARCHERS ALSO OPPOSE
PRESIDENT TRUMP'S DESIRE TO
WITHDRAW FROM THE 2015 PARIS
CLIMATE CHANGE ACCORD, WHICH
COMMITTED THE U.S. AND 194 OTHER
NATIONS TO REDUCE EMISSIONS THAT
CAUSE GLOBAL WARMING BY 25% BY
THE YEAR 2025.
>> I'M HERE TO MAKE A STATEMENT
ABOUT THE STUPIDITY OF DENYING
CLIMATE CHANGE.
AND IT'S URGENT.
WE NEED TO DO SOMETHING NOW.
IT'S IMPORTANT TO LIVE.
>>THIS IS WHAT DEMOCRACY LOOKS
LIKE!
>> Thompson: ALSO MOTIVATING
THOSE IN ATTENDANCE, THE WHITE
HOUSE HAS PROPOSED CUTTING THE
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
BUDGET BY 30%.
AND JUST YESTERDAY, THE
PRESIDENT SIGNED AN EXECUTIVE
ORDER TO EXPAND OFFSHORE
DRILLING FOR OIL AND GAS IN ONCE
PROTECTED ARCTIC AND ATLANTIC
WATERS.
>> IF SOMETHING ISN'T DONE, THE
STAKES ARE ENORMOUS BECAUSE THEY
ARE TALKING ABOUT MORE
POLLUTION.
THAT'S GOING TO PUT MORE
POLLUTION IN THE AIR LIKE
ARSENIC AND MERCURY, AND IN OUR
WATER, AND THAT AFFECTS THE AIR
OUR KIDS BREATH AND THE WATER
THEY DRINK.
>> Thompson: LOOKING TO NEXT
YEAR'S MIDTERM CONGRESSIONAL
ELECTIONS, MARCH ORGANIZERS SAID
THEY'LL SUPPORT CANDIDATES WITH
STRONG ENVIRONMENTAL RECORDS.
SMALLER "PEOPLE'S CLIMATE
MARCHES" TOOK PLACE IN DOZENS OF
OTHER CITIES.
THE MARCHES OCCURRED ONE WEEK
AFTER THE EARTH DAY MARCHES FOR
SCIENCE, WHICH HAD DEMANDED
RESPECT FOR FACT-BASED,
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN PUBLIC
POLICY.
>> Thompson: AND COMING UP ON
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SUNDAY, AN
INNOVATIVE PROGRAM THAT AIMS TO
REDUCE THE SOMETIMES VIOLENT
INTERACTIONS BETWEEN HUMANS AND
ELEPHANTS IN TANZANIA.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M MEGAN THOMPSON.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.